## Exercise #2: Describing Patterns in Accelerometer Data

In this dataset, fifteen participants were fitted with a chest mounted accelerometer and were asked to do seven different activities. The activities were: working at a computer, standing up then walking and then going up and down stairs, standing, walking, going up and down stairs, walking and talking with someone, and talking while standing. The data from the accelerometer was recorded in three main points, the x, y, and z coordinates of the person during each of the activities and was recorded at approximately 52Hz or about 52 readings per second. The x, y, and z points represent the persons change in direction from left to right, back and forth, and up and down although it is unclear from the data which point represents with pair of directionality specifically. Each reading also was labeled to identify which activity was being recorded. The goal of this exercise is to identify patterns in the data that can help to signify which activity the person was doing.

For this exercise I chose to compare the data of the first four participants to see if I could spot some similarities in the patterns of their data. In order to get the data in a state where it was viewable I first had to read in the files and separate the data based on the activity labels. Once I had the sets of data for each activity I pulled out each x, y, and z column from the set and normalized it so that the values would be between 0 and 1. Once the data was normalized I plotted it on a simple line graph and while you could see data it was a jumble of all three columns on top of each other this was making it hard to discern what was happening. To remedy this I transformed the x column’s data by shifting it up by adding the mean to each point and shifted the z column’s data down by subtracting the mean from each point. This seperated each line of data so that you could view them side by side. Lastly to better differentiate the columns I set the colors of the x, y, and z data to red, green, and blue respectively. Now that the data was in a good viewable state it was much easier to spot patterns.

The first pattern I noticed immediately in all of the figures was in all of the Walking activity data. The graphs for each participant are nearly identical in that each line is pretty consistently varied over the timespan this causes the graphs to show consistent spikes up and down in each of the x, y, and z coordinates. This was surprising to me because when a person walks it seems that only their back and forth coordinates would vary if they were walking in a straight line so I assumed that only one of the columns of data would have such consistent variation and the other two columns would be pretty still.

Another obvious pattern I noticed was when a person is standing still. In the Working at a computer, and the Standing activity data sets you can clearly see when the coordinates of the person are very low in variation over the timespan which creates a ‘flatline’ effect in the graph. In the Standing data specifically it seems to me that the person would stand up and then stand for a period of about a minute and then sit down and stand back up again because there are spikes in movement across all columns at about that time range. You see a similar spike pattern at the beginning and the end of the Working at a Computer dataset which leads me to believe that the person was first recorded sitting down at the computer, working at the computer for about five minutes and then also recorded getting up from the computer. This pattern was very consistent in all on the figures for those activities. 

The next interesting pattern I noticed was in the Talking While Standing datasets of the four participants. I could see similarities of the ‘flatline’ effect in this dataset that was also apparent in the Standing dataset. However in this particular graph there are sporadic spikes in activity that break up the flat lines in the columns that lead me to believe that the participants were using their bodies to also communicate meaning like most humans often do during conversations. The hand movements and gestures that happen during conversation are probably what caused those spikes between all of the participants I compared. 

The last pattern I noticed in the graphs was in the Going up/down Stairs datasets. It appears to me that the participants were first recorded standing still for a short period and then begins climbing or going down the set of stairs because there is a clear flatline at the beginning of each participants data. The data that represents the person going up or down stairs are similar is variation to the person walking but are much more spread out over the timespan than the walking data. You can also clearly notice the consistency in the spikes that would naturally occur when you are climbing stairs. What throws me off a little though is that this same pattern also appears in the Walking and Talking with Someone dataset. In fact side by side it is nearly impossible for me to seperate the two. To me it seems very odd that the walking pattern differs so much in this dataset to the walking only dataset. The only explanation I can come up with the the speed at which the participants were walking somehow made such a difference in the graph patterns.
